# Schematic documentation

This app was built on top of a schematic [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) model that has the capability to completely describe a circuit in an intuitive way. It was initially idealized by Prof. André Rocha, and then modified and implemented by Pedro Morim.

> This is the documentation for **v1.0.0** of the JSON schema.

This model is the core of the `circuit-editor` app and it is used by others. Therefore, it is very important that it is followed strictly.

> This documentation uses the [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) syntax to describe the types of the schematic elements.

## Index

- [Basic types](#basic-types)
  - [ID](#id)
  - [Properties](#properties)
  - [Position](#position)
- [Secondary types](#secondary-types)
  - [Port](#port)
  - [Label](#label)
  - [Vertex](#vertex)
- [Main Types](#main-types)
  - [Component](#component)
  - [Connection](#connection)
  - [Node](#node)
- [Schematic](#schematic)

## Basic types

These are some simple helper types created to remove the redundancy of the more complex types.

### ID

Each element needs to have it's own ID so that it can easily identified in the schematic. The only requirement is that the ID needs to be a **unique** string.

```ts
type ID = string;
```

In this app, the IDs are generated by the `v4` method of the [UUID](https://www.npmjs.com/package/uuid) library. For example, an ID can be something like this:  `"8c0168ec-07fe-4b2c-96ee-4292ab34cfb2"`.

### Properties

Each component can have its own specific set of properties. What those properties are depends on the type of component. As of writing this, no specific properties have been implemented yet.

```ts
type Properties = Object;
```

For example:

- A **DC Voltage Source** can have a property to describe its internal resistance.

- A **Resistor** can have its internal temperature has a property.

- ...

### Position

Each element must have a position so that it can be placed in the schematic. These come in two types:

- Global: The position relative to the origin of the schematic/canvas.

- Relative: The position relative to the origin of its parent element. Ranges from 0 to 1.

```ts
interface Position {
  x: number;
  y: number;
  angle?: number;
}

type GlobalPosition = Position
type RelativePosition = Position
```

Note: `x` and `y` refer to the distance, in pixels, to the origin. While, `angle` refers to the rotation, in degrees, of the element.

## Secondary types

These types make use of the [basic ones](#basic-types) (shown above), but are, nonetheless, not as complex, nor as important as the [main ones](#main-types). They simply describe small parts/modules of the aforementioned.

### Port

The `Port` is the connection point of a `Component`. It allows its owner to be connected to the circuit. It can only allow an `input`, an `output`, be an `hybrid` (allow both) - the default.

```ts
interface Port {
  id: ID;
  type?: 'hybrid' | 'input' | 'output';
  position: RelativePosition;
  owner?: ID;
  connection?: ID;
}
```

It can also contain a reference to its `owner` and to the `connection` that is attached to it. It should also be noted that it can only hold one connection at a time - unlike a `Node`.

> The `Port`s position has a unique twist to it. The values of `x` and `y` should range from 0 to 1, where 0 is the origin and 1 is the extreme of the component. It was created this way to simplify the creation of components, since, this way, it does not depend on its size to fit, it only depends on the its ratio.

### Label

The `Label` is responsible for holding the text that visually differentiates each element.

```ts
interface Label {
  id: ID;
  name: string;
  value: string;
  unit: string;
  position: Position;
  isNameHidden?: boolean;
  isValueHidden?: boolean;
  owner?: ID;
}
```

It can hold a `name`, `value` and `unit`. For example, a **resistor** with the label "R1 = 10 kΩ" should have a label as follows:

```js
{
  ...
  "name": "R1",
  "value": "10k", // Or "10 k"
  "unit": "Ω"
  ...
}
```

The label can have some variations:

- No `value`: **"R1 (Ω)"**
- No `unit`: **"R1 = 10 k"**
- No `value` and no `unit`: **"R1"**

It can also contain a reference to its `owner`, and flags that controls if some parts of the label should be hidden, `isNameHidden` and `isValueHidden` respectively.

## Vertex

The vertex is what allows the user to customize the connection path. It is visually represented, unlike the node, as a square.

```ts
interface Vertex {
  id: ID;
  owner?: ID;
  position: Position;
}
```

The color of the vertex will be the same as its `Connection`. The size is defined in the `Connection`'s properties.

## Main types

These are the most complex types and hold the most data. They are the heart of this schema.

### Component

The `Component` can represent any kind of electrical component: a resistor, a capacitor, a voltage source, a voltmeter, etc...

```ts
interface Component {
  id: ID;
  type: string;
  fullName: string;
  position: GlobalPosition;
  label: Label;
  ports: Port[];
  properties?: Properties;
}
```

Its important to distinguish the `type` from the `fullName`:

- The `type`, as the name implies, it describes the type of the component. For example, a resistor should have a `type` of **"R"**.

- The `fullName` describes a more human-friendly version of the `type`. For example, a resistor should have a `fullName` of **"Resistor"**

### Connection

The `Connection` represents the physical wire connection between `Component`s' `Port`s and `Node`s. It holds two main values: `start` and `end` which are the `ID`s of the two `Port`s or `Node`s that are connected.

```ts
interface Connection {
  id: ID;
  start: ID;
  end: ID;
  vertices: Vertex[]
  properties?: {
    color: string;
    dashed: boolean;
    dashedAnimationSpeed: number;
    strokeWidth: number;
    vertexRadius: number;
  };
}
```

A much needed upgrade is the ability to also store the `vertexes` of the connection. This addition would then allow the user to freely adjust the connection to their liking. Unfortunately, this feature is not yet implemented. Maybe in v2.0.0...

### Node

`Node`s are just connection "hubs": points that can hold multiple connections - unlike `Port`s.

```ts
interface Node {
  id: ID;
  type?: 'real' | 'virtual';
  position: GlobalPosition;
  label: Label;
  connections?: ID[];
  properties?: {
    color: string;
    radius: number;
  };
}
```

A `Node` is considered of `"real"` if it holds **more than 2 connections** simultaneously. Otherwise it is just considered a `"virtual"` node.

## Schematic

Joining all of the `Main Types`, each into their specific array, it is then possible to describe the entire circuit schematic in just a single JSON file.

```ts
interface Schematic {
  components: Component[];
  connections: Connection[];
  nodes: Node[];
}
```
